---
title: Compte-rendu de la réunion IRC du 2015-11-19
permalink: /fr/meetings/2015/11/19/
name: 2015-11-19-meeting
type: meetings
layout: page
lang: fr
version: 1
---
## Logs

- [lien vers les logs de cette semaine](http://bitcoinstats.com/irc/bitcoin-dev/logs/2015/11/19#l1447959611.0)  
- [Procès-verbal généré par meetbot](http://www.erisian.com.au/meetbot/bitcoin-dev/2015/bitcoin-dev.2015-11-19-19.00.html)  

## Sujets principaux  
  
- transaction priority   
- dealing with mempool eviction   
- Sequence numbers  

### Sujets annexes  

[Opt-in replace by fee](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/6871) needs some extra testing, but otherwise seems ready to go. Some wallet developers are onboard and actively participating, for example GreenAddress. 

##transaction priority

### contexte  

Each transaction is assigned a priority, determined by the age, size, and number of inputs. Which currently makes some transactions free.   
This currently has a large amount of code, which makes it harder to maintain, and is not that optimal since you can't expect miners to include 0-fee transactions.  

### commentaires

If we don't stop support for priority in transaction creation we also need a mempool area for priority, or those transactions will always get evicted.  
If we develop a better framework to support these kind of metrics we can add it back.  
Plan is to remove the priority transaction creation from the wallet, not the mining part.  

### conclusion  

Creation of priority transactions should be removed from the wallet.  

##dealing with mempool eviction

### contexte  

When a transaction is relayed across the network it is held by the nodes in memory, until it gets into a block. All these transactions that sit in memory are called the memorypool or mempool for short.  
Like we could see during the spam-attack if there's a big back-log of transactions that couldn't make it in the blockchain this mempool can get pretty big resulting in nodes crashing.  

To stop this from happening devs created a mechanism to reject and/or remove transactions from the mempool.  

### commentaires

Current problem: when a wallet transaction is rejected by the mempool, the wallet considers the resulting transaction as "conflicting" and will happily respend the inputs.   
sipa proposes to make the wallet only treat a transaction as conflicting if it has non-existing inputs.  
It should however consider it respendable at some time later on.   
You could add a way to manually remove transactions, or tag is as removed, or archive it.  
You could also do something separate that marks the transaction as respendable, as removal gives the impression the transaction can't be mined in the future.  
Options that are wanted: a "respend with higher fee" option and an option to forget about a transaction completely, we need a minimum viable idea for 0.12 though.  

### conclusion

Given the tight deadline for 0.12 we detect actual conflict instead of mempool eviction and leave the coins immediately respendable.  

## Sequence numbers**

### contexte

[BIP 68](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0068.mediawiki) repurposes some of the unused nSequence field to a relative locktime, meaning locking inputs until a certain time or blockheight has passed.    

### commentaires

We need to wait for BIP113 to be deployed as standardness so [BIP 68](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0068.mediawiki), [112](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0112.mediawiki) and [113](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0113.mediawiki) can go in a softfork.  
There's upcoming projects that already use sequence numbers.  
Merging BIP68 would make BIP112 easier to review and would stop the need to [rebase](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/rewriting-history/git-rebase) all the time.  
If we feel the 68/112 are sufficiently reviewed and mature they could go in as standardness rules.  
The BIP text doesn't seem to reflect what's written in the code.  
 
## conclusion

Check BIP68 to match the [implementation](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/6312)

##Participants

    sipa               Pieter Wuille  
    gmaxwell           Gregory Maxwell  
    morcos             Alex Morcos  
    jtimon             Jorge Timón  
    wumpus             Wladimir J. van der Laan  
    btcdrak            btcdrak  
    jgarzik            Jeff Garzik  
    petertodd          Peter Todd   
    Luke-Jr            Luke Dashjr   
    BlueMatt           Matt Corallo   
    jonasschnelli      Jonas Schnelli  
    CodeShark          Eric Lombrozo  
    sdaftuar           Suhas Daftuar   
    gavinand1esen      Gavin Andresen   

## Crédits

Ce compte-rendu a été réalisé par Stefan Gilis alias “G1lius”, diffusé à la [liste de diffusion bitcoin-discuss][meetingsource] avec l’avertissement suivant “SVP comprenez que je ne suis pas un développeur de sorte que certains points pourraient être incorrects ou complètement faux.” et placé dans le domaine public.

[meetingsource]: http://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-discuss/2015-November/000028.html