---
title: Compte-rendu de la réunion IRC du 2015-12-03
permalink: /fr/meetings/2015/12/03/
name: 2015-12-03-meeting
type: meetings
layout: page
lang: fr
version: 1
---
## Logs

- [lien vers les logs de cette semaine](http://bitcoinstats.com/irc/bitcoin-dev/logs/2015/12/03#l1449169187.0)  
- [Procès-verbal généré par meetbot](http://www.erisian.com.au/meetbot/bitcoin-dev/2015/bitcoin-dev.2015-12-03-18.59.html)  (slightly bugged logs as you'll see)

## Sujets principaux

- BIP68-related pull requests  
- Eviction and onions   
- BIP for opt-in RBF  

## Sujets annexes

A lot of developers where traveling to the scaling bitcoin conference ([videos](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCql9h_eXmusjt-f3k8qLwPQ/videos)), so this is again a shorter, and it'll likely be the same next week (as a lot of developers stay in Hong Kong for the [developer meetup](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2015-November/011712.html) after the conference).  

Also a reminder to anyone that's running a full node to update their node to core 11.2 or 10.4, or any other node that supports BIP65 CLTV, to accommodate for the upcoming softfork. Not updating will mean you'll be trusting miners to produce valid blocks. 85% of miners advertise they support CLTV transactions and the softfork will activate when 95% is reached, currently (time of writing) +/- 30% of nodes is updated. 

## Pull-requests relatives à BIP68

### contexte  

[BIP 68](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0068.mediawiki)  Consensus-enforced transaction replacement signaled via les numéros de séquence, et [implémentation actuelle](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/6312).  
BIP 68 change la signification du champ de numéro de séquence précédemment inutilisé pour en faire un verrou de temps (locktime) relatif.  

### commentaires

There is a [pull-request](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/252) for a small correction in the comments of the code.  
There's been work on optimizing CreateNewBlock (which does what it says). Morcos and sdaftuar are looking at two approaches, one of which will [refactor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_refactoring) the BIP68 implementation significantly.  
As the refactoring would be better done before BIP68 gets merged, it would be good to know which approach is better.  

### conclusion  

Look into the CreateNewBlock optimization approaches.  

## Eviction and onions

### contexte  

Starting with Tor version 0.2.7.1 it is possible to create hidden services programmatically. Bitcoin will now automatically create a hidden service to listen on if Tor is running.

### commentaires

Localhost peers are never evicted; so as soon as you show up on a hidden service someone can prevent anyone else from connecting to you trivially.   
Pull-request [#7082](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/7082) addresses this problem by using latency to detect actual local peers.   
You can also use whitelists to distinguish between real localhost connections and tor localhost connections, but that might break existing software.   
wumpus notes we should encourage using the whitelist for special peers in the long term. 

### conclusion

Take a look at Pull-request [#7082](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/7082)

## BIP for opt-in RBF

### contexte

Actuellement quand un nœud voit une transaction qui dépense le même output il l'ignore. Avec replace-by-fee il remplace la transaction dans le mempool si elle paie des frais plus élevés.   
Ceci permet par exemple de dépenser des transactions "bloquées" ou bien d'ajouter d'autres destinataires à une transaction pour éviter les chaînages, etc.  

Comme certaines personnes acceptent les transactions avec 0-confirmation et qu'il serait très facile de les abuser avec une double-dépense, cette fonctionnalité n'est pas activée par défaut.  
L'expéditeur peut choisir d'opter pour replace-by-fee en modifiant le champ nSequence de tous les inputs.   
C'est une politique de mempool disponible dans la version 0.12 à venir.
Une bonne [publication de type FAQ](https://www.reddit.com/r/Bitcoin/comments/3urm8o/optin_rbf_is_misunderstood_ask_questions_about_it/) a été postée sur reddit à ce sujet.

### commentaires

Question is if opt-in RBF should have a BIP or not.  
It is just policy code, however standardness has been covered before in BIPs.  
sdaftuar notes it's unfortunate that the only documentation for what wallet writers should do is in a single mailing list post.  
harding volunteers to write the BIP.

### conclusion

harding will write the BIP in coordination with petertodd.

## Participants

    wumpus          Wladimir J. van der Laan  
    morcos          Alex Morcos  
    btcdrak         btcdrak  
    sipa  	        Pieter Wuille  
    gmaxwell        Gregory Maxwell  
    cfields         Cory Fields   
    jonasschnelli  	Jonas Schnelli  
    Diablo-D3  	    Patrick McFarland  
    sdaftuar        Suhas Daftuar  
    harding         David A. Harding  
    jcorgan         Johnathan Corgan   

## Notes d'humour

    19:26	cfields	sec, i'll like the mail thread  
    19:26	sipa	cfields: you'll "like" it, is it on facebook?  
    19:27	wumpus	twitter has 'likes' now too :')  

## Crédits

Ce compte-rendu a été réalisé par Stefan Gilis alias “G1lius”, diffusé à la [liste de diffusion bitcoin-discuss][meetingsource] avec l’avertissement suivant “SVP comprenez que je ne suis pas un développeur de sorte que certains points pourraient être incorrects ou complètement faux.” et placé dans le domaine public.

[meetingsource]: http://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-discuss/2015-December/000036.html