---
title: Non-IRC meeting summary for 2016-05-20
permalink: /en/meetings/2016/05/20/
name: 2016-05-20-meeting
type: meetings
layout: page
lang: en
version: 1
---
{% include _toc.html %}

(Note this page is still a work-in-progress and may be revised as more details are summarised.)

## Main topics

- Segregated witness code review
- Error correcting codes for future address types
- Encryption for the peer-to-peer network protocol
- Compact block relay protocol
- Schnorr signatures and aggregation
- New networking library

## Notes / short topics

- This meeting was held in person in Zurich, Switzerland rather than the usual IRC channel. Details at <http://coredev.tech/>.
- Some participants took the opportunity to verify PGP fingerprints and sign each others' keys, to expand the PGP web of trust around Bitcoin for improved security.
- The special travis caching features that Bitcoin Core is using should now available to all GitHub users, so the CI tests should run on arbitrary repositories, and not just the Bitcoin Core one.
- Greg Maxwell noted that some developers appear to be getting an influx of PDF malware.

## Segregated witness code review

### background

Segregated witness is a change to omit signatures from the canonical transaction ids, to eliminate unintentional malleability. It also as a side effect takes the opportunity to improve scalability and increase the maximum block size.

### meeting comments

Jonas Nick backported segnet (a custom testnet dedicated to segregated witness testing) to 0.9 and checked segwit backward compatibility and upgrading post-activation to a segwit-enabled version. Suhas collected a list of remaining tests. Much code review was done, resulting in a few minor bug fixes. Uncertainty with regard to the unusual requirements of fund-raw-transaction was discussed.

### meeting conclusion

- Fund-raw-transaction should not present a need to change consensus segwit code.
- sdaftuar drew up a list of extra tests that should be written.
- Mining: work out how GBT will work (non-segwit aware software shouldn't be able to signal segwit's version bit); see #7935 for some context of how we'll likely implement
- Seed nodes for segwit - being worked on by jonasschnelli
- Add documentation to release notes.
- review how are we handling misbehaving peers.

## Error correcting codes for future address types

### background

For most of Bitcoin's history, a custom base-58 encoding has been used for Bitcoin addresses. Efforts to migrate to a payment protocol have not been successful, so there is possibly demand for new address types in the future. Base-58 is commonly considered a poor encoding, so there is some desire to come up with a new one that improves on it for future address types.

### meeting comments

Pieter gave a status update on his work on high performance base-32 BCH codes for future address type definitions. Pieter has made good progress finding trivial to implement codes which have good performance (e.g. 30 correction bits giving certain detection of up to 4 transposition errors or 4 substitution errors.)

### meeting conclusion

Using error correction logic for reliable error detection is a good idea, but should explicitly not try to correct user error for security reasons.

## Encryption for the peer-to-peer network protocol

### background

The protocol used to communicate between Bitcoin nodes has always been unencrypted, since communications are considered public. However, there is desire to have the option of security for users who run thin clients for their wallet, yet want to use their own private node for security.

### meeting comments

Jonas Schnelli has updated the BIP and it now looks like it's ready for a trial implementation. Beyond improving privacy this change should also make the p2p protocol have less CPU overhead.

### meeting conclusion

The draft BIP is now published in the BIPs repository, and Jonas will be working on an implementation.

## Compact block relay protocol

### background

Bandwidth is a major bottleneck in relaying blocks across the peer-to-peer network. Unless this bottleneck can be reduced, larger block sizes can be very damaging to Bitcoin's decentralisation qualities.

### meeting comments

More people were asked to review the mempool interactions (esp. the use of reference counting instead of copying.)

### meeting conclusion

Continue review of BIP draft and Core implementation.

## Schnorr signatures and aggregation

### background

Currently Bitcoin requires a single signature for each output consumed in a transaction, and for each party in the case of multisig coins. Schnorr signatures allow combining these into a single signature which can then be checked for the entire transaction, reducing validation time and data size significantly.

### meeting comments

Pieter went over the state of his thinking about constructions for schnorr signatures and signature aggregation.

### meeting conclusion

The general expectation is that a BIP related to Schnorr signatures would be made within the next 12 months.

## New networking library

### background

Bitcoin Core's networking code is very minimal and not very flexible or easy to improve on. Cory has been working on rewriting it.

### meeting comments

Cory Fields provided an overview of his recent work on a new networking library.

### meeting conclusion

This could eventually be used to remove the dependency on boost in the source code.

## Participants

| IRC nick      | Name/Nym                  |
|---------------|---------------------------|
| adam3us       | [Adam Back][]             |
| kanzure       | [Bryan Bishop][]          |
| jcorgan       | [Johnathan Corgan][]      |
| sdaftuar      | [Suhas Daftuar][]         |
| luke-jr       | [Luke Dashjr][]           |
|               | [Tadge Dryja][]           |
| MarcoFalke    | [Marco Falke][]           |
| cfields       | [Cory Fields][]           |
| maaku         | [Mark Friedenbach][]      |
| wumpus        | [Wladimir van der Laan][] |
| jl2012        | [Johnson Lau][]           |
| CodeShark     | [Eric Lombrozo][]         |
| gmaxwell      | [Gregory Maxwell][]       |
| nickler       | [Jonas Nick][]            |
| instagibbs    | [Gregory Sanders][]       |
| jonasschnelli | [Jonas Schnelli][]        |
| jtimon        | [Jorge Tim√≥n][]           |
| petertodd     | [Peter Todd][]            |
| sipa          | [Pieter Wuille][]         |

## Disclaimer

This summary was compiled without input from some of the participants in the discussion, so errors may be the fault of the summary and not the discussion participants.

{% include _references.md %}
